Customer Expectations
To increase the likelihood of a successful run we ask that our partners submit the following documentation to the quality systems team prior to startup:

Ingredients 
Ingredients for tests will need to be procured by the customer or in coordination with Steuben purchasing. In some instances, there are certain ingredients that we prefer to supply. If your formulas require milk, we prefer to use our milk. Ingredients used in the facility are inventoried and controlled by: 
Ingredient Supplier & contact information 
Ingredient Item Number & Lot Number
Ingredient Description 
Vendor supplied specification sheets for each ingredient
Copies of all available certificates
MSDS documents
Quantity of each ingredient required for production trials
 
Kosher Registration and Certifications 
Steuben Foods does not prepare applications for Kosher Designations on behalf of our partners. It is the customer’s responsibility to have the product certified for Kosher Designation. Each ingredient needs to be submitted to the Orthodox Union for Schedule A assignment. This requirement must be met regardless of the Kosher designation of the end product.
 
Allergen Statement 
Our facility currently processes products that may or may not contain any one of the big eight allergens with the exception of peanuts. A list of allergens contained in the product and a run order if there are multiple flavors must be provided by our partners for evaluation.
 
Formulation and Blending Procedure 
Formulas are controlled internally by a formula number and formula description. A given formulation may go into several finished goods. If customers choose not to provide their own formula numbers we will internally provide a number along with a revision date. 
 
WIP QC Requirements 
We produce very large blends and refrigerate them until processing begins. There are many specifications that may need to be checked when the product is all batched but yet to be processed. These may include pH, total solids, °Brix, salt levels, or any other critical specification that needs to be measured before processing. A list of all QC testing requirements for pre-processing (Raw Product) and post-process (Finished Product) testing along with test limits (Min, Target, Max) and reporting requirements must be provided. 
 
Manufacturing Process 
Steuben Foods uses the National Food Labs (NFL) as our Process Authority for processing parameters. Each new product must be evaluated by the NFL and filed with the FDA based on NFL recommendations before a product can be processed. 
 
Packaging Information 
It is imperative that the package label is communicated to Steuben Foods Inc. We ask that our customers provide packaging and label information relevant to the country of sale. Package declaration weight is an important piece of a successful plant trial. If the product is volume filled, an estimate of the final density of the formula should be provided 
Any customer supplied materials will need to have:
Packaging Information and Descriptions 
Packaging Materials Resource Numbers
Required pallet patterns, type of pallet, straws, caps, etc. 
 
Coding 
Coding requirements for primary, secondary, and tertiary packaging including shelf life coding must be agreed upon at least 1 week prior to any plant trial or production run. We generally code by expiration date. The requirements for any coding to comply with State, Provincial and Federal regulations must also be verified. 
 
Finished Good Item Number 
All finished goods must have an item number assigned. We can provide test numbers but this would need to be discussed in advance.
 
Finished Product QC Requirements 
When we receive Client requirements for QC testing, we will determine if we can perform the required tests with the equipment we have available. If we can’t perform the test we will either propose a comparable substitute test, or suggest an outside lab. Our quality Team requires, as detailed information as possible on the following items and procedures: 
Proximate analysis (total solids and fat)
Any specific nutrients (Vitamin C)
Textural analysis (viscosity)
Chemical and physical characteristics (pH, density)
Microbiological analyses 
Finished Product Specifications
 
Customer Sample Requirements 
Any extra sampling needed during the test run needs to be indicated before the trial. We’ll need contact names and addresses to send the samples, once incubation is completed. Please include a shipping address and a shipping account number if samples are required during the trial. Since we are making Aseptic products all samples will not be shipped until the incubation period (5 to 7 days) and testing is completed. Once everything is deemed acceptable and a positive release is completed by Steuben, we can immediately ship samples to the parties who require them.
 
Customer Contact Information 
We keep in touch with all our partners and prefer to have a single point of contact. Ideally, this individual should have the authority to make final decisions on all aspects of the product that is being tested or manufactured. If this isn’t feasible, then a detailed contact list should be included in the product information package.


HACCP
Our Hazard Analysis and Critical Control Point program (HACCP) is a systematic approach to ensure all our products are free from contaminants. It is based on requirements established by the federal government as a means to develop and ensure a safe food supply to our customer.
 
We perform a hazard analysis from raw materials through to finished product. Each finished product has a written description of the food characteristics, product group, consumer use, label instruction on storage after opened, shelf life, special distribution and storage control, the conditions under which it is packaged and how it is packaged and sold. 
 
Critical Control Points (CCP) identify points in the process where a loss of control may result in an unacceptable health risk. Steuben Foods uses a processing Authority to assist in determining critical limits for each CCP. This is the minimum or maximum level that is acceptable for food safety and regulatory standards. Each CCP is continuously monitored and documented for compliance to each set specification. A corrective action plan is established as a guide when control points are outside the control limits and we annually review all our plans for accuracy and conformity. 
 
Our HACCP Plans
 
Extended Shelf Life (ESL)			
Our Elopak and Evergreen fillers produce refrigerated paper-carton beverages by using heat-sealed paperboard with polymer laminate. ESL products are heat treated micro-sensitive beverages and therefore must be refrigerated during distribution and retail. 
The Astepo fillers produce a low-acid beverage that is commercially sterilized and ESL packaged in “Bag-In-Box” containers. The product may be Consumed Directly from the 2 gallon package or poured into a secondary container for direct use or use as a component of other foods. 
 
Bottle Line
Our bottle line produces liquid foods that are commercially sterilized and aseptically packaged in  sturdy plastic (HDPE) bottles on stork filling systems. Marketed as beverages or components of beverages or other liquid foods and consumed directly from the package or poured into secondary containers.
 
Combibloc
Our Combibloc line ultrasonically seals multilayer paperboard, fibrous material to produce high quality other liquid foods that can be consumed directly from the package or poured into secondary containers. Combibloc packaging has four fully printable display surfaces that produce attractive and durable packs. Combibloc products are appropriate for general retail, food service and institutional food consumers. 
 
Tetra 
Tetra low-acid and high acid liquid foods are commercially sterilized and aseptically packaged in Tetra Brik containers on Tetra Pak filling systems. The cost efficient packaging is made up of paper-polyethylene aluminum foil. Steuben Foods runs a wide range of Tetra Pak products including, but not limited to organic/non-organic flavored/unflavored milk, soy beverages, thickened dairy beverages, nutritional supplement beverages, broths, coffee flavored coolatta base, and non-dairy creamer. All these products may be consumed directly from the package or poured into secondary container for direct use or use as a component of other foods. All Tetra Pak products are ready for general retail, food service and institutional food consumers.  
 
Raw Dairy
By using HTST processing, strainers, magnets, and lab testing we are able to prevent potential biological, chemical and physical hazards in our raw dairy plant. Our dairy product groups typically include nutritional supplemental beverages and single serve drinks. Our milk and cream is also available as a wholesale ingredient.
 
Processing
We use aseptic processors to pasteurize or commercially sterilize product.  This involves the use of steam that can be directly added to product or indirectly used in a heat exchange section. Each system is regularly audited and documented by recording charts for temperature, conductivity, and flow rate. 
 
After each production batch the processing systems and surge tanks are cleaned and sterilized. Our processors can also perform aseptic intermediate cleaning (AIC) while maintaining sterile conditions and/or sterile product in the Aseptic Surge Tank. Our blending and processing systems follow Kosher rules. For more information see the section on Kosher standards. 
 

SQF
Our goal at Steuben Foods is to continually produce safe and quality foods for our partners. In an effort to promote the Global Food Safety Initiative we’ve achieved and maintain SQF level 3 certification. By using SQF standards as a starting point for our own GMP program we reduce inconsistencies of multiple assessment standards and keep our plant “audit ready” at all times.
 
Steuben employees accept the daily responsibility of meeting SQF level 3 standards. Our system supports each employee by providing clear direction relative to customer requirements. Each member of Steuben Foods is trained in SQF Policies and is informed about how to use them to accomplish the manufacture of safe and wholesome foods. Well-trained employees proficient in their job functions are integral to the quality and safety of foods produced at Steuben Foods.  Therefore, it is critical that training be developed and implemented for all job functions within Steuben Foods. 
 
Our goal at Steuben Foods is to continually produce safe and quality foods for our partners. In an effort to promote the Global Food Safety Initiative we’ve achieved and maintain SQF level 3 certification. By using SQF standards as a starting point for our own GMP program we reduce inconsistencies of multiple assessment standards and keep our plant “audit ready” at all times.
 
Steuben employees accept the daily responsibility of meeting SQF level 3 standards. Our system supports each employee by providing clear direction relative to customer requirements. Each member of Steuben Foods is trained in SQF Policies and is informed about how to use them to accomplish the manufacture of safe and wholesome foods. Well-trained employees proficient in their job functions are integral to the quality and safety of foods produced at Steuben Foods.  Therefore, it is critical that training be developed and implemented for all job functions within Steuben Foods. 
 
Process flow
The process flow is designed to prevent cross contamination and organized in a continuous flow of product through the process. Flow of personnel is designed to allow limited access to sensitive areas.  All access points to the plant are through the main entrances. All other access doors are secured from the outside and are marked exit only.
 
Receipt of Raw Materials
All dry ingredients and packaging are received and stored separately from frozen and chilled raw material. Frozen raw materials aren’t stored onsite; Steuben doesn’t have a frozen storage facility. Frozen material received for use in blending within 48 hours is stored in the refrigerated cooler until use. Chilled raw materials are received separate from dry materials and are stored in the refrigerated cooler. Dry materials are received in and stored in the dry warehouse. Packaging material is stored in the dry warehouse but not in the same rack as raw ingredients so there is no risk of cross-contamination. 
 
Thawing
Ingredient thawing is accomplished with cold air flow inside properly constructed cooler rooms so as to eliminate deterioration or contamination. Most containers are recycled and those that aren’t are discarded immediately after use. 
 
Foreign Body Control
Raw material is handled to ensure cross contamination is minimized from receipt through to blending. Personnel in position of receiving, storage, staging and blending are trained yearly on cross contamination prevention. Products are ultra-pasteurized and processed in an enclosed system from kill step to packaging.  There are no high risk areas and no post process handling exists. Blending operators wear protective covering while blending. 
 
Facility equipment is designed to promote segregation and eliminate the possibility of cross contamination. An in-line strainer and/or magnet are in place in most tanker receiving systems, all blend systems, and all processing systems.  Operators check these controls between receipts and production batches. Maintenance calibrates each magnet as part of our preventative maintenance program. In-line strainer and magnet documents are kept for 6 years. 
 
Training
A training register exists and is maintained by the training department. Our training database is separated out by job description and lists employee’s name, description of training, date completed and skills linked in by Job descriptions. 
 
Document Control 
The development and control of all documents used for production in the plant is a vital operation at Steuben Foods. Access to the most current documents is provided via the LAN.  Read-access is provided with write-access limited to the appropriate editing department.  A register of all controlled documents and policies is stored for six years after production.
 
Customer Complaints 
Complaints are investigated on a per case basis. Complaint information is generally provided through customer information or from an affected consumer directly to Steuben Foods in the case of company products. Whatever the source, information regarding problems experienced by a consumer are acted upon in a timely and thorough manner. Complaints are analyzed by personnel knowledgeable of the situation and a record of the complaint and investigation is maintained. Standard investigation methods include evaluation of retention samples, review of previous similar complaints and production run records.  Upon completion, a summary of the investigation and results are sent to the customer. 
 
Product Recall 
If a food safety issue is identified, Steuben Foods will implement a Product Recall. Our recall procedure identifies the location of product so that it can be isolated and retrieved. We bi-annually test our recall procedure to ensure its effectiveness. If a recall is necessary, the following actions will be taken immediately, regardless of the time of day or day of week.
1: Investigate to confirm the presence of a health hazard.
2: Contact the customer.
3: Obtain information from all sources involved in the incident. 
4: Trace all lots involved to final customer and /or Food Service point. 
5: Place all products in question (still under our control) on “Hold” from shipment.
 
Product Identification 
Steuben Foods has a product identification system in place to monitor, identify, analyze and trace all raw materials received for usage at all stages in the process. Ingredients and packaging are received into our Protean inventory control system and identified by a unique resource number so they can be tracked through the entire process from receipt to finished product. 
 
Steuben utilizes pallet tags with a barcode and colored allergen identifying stickers. Physical records of receipt are retained. We receive packaging approved by our customers for proper labeling and adherence to regulatory requirements. Coding is placed on the packaging in accordance with customer guidelines and regulatory requirements. Our product identification system is tested bi-annually for effectiveness through Steuben Foods Mock Recall policy.  
 
Product Traceability
Finished product is traceable to the customer. A product trace procedure provides for the identification of Raw materials and other inputs that may have an impact on finished product quality. Raw materials are traceable through the process to the finished product. Records of product dispatch and destination are maintained.
 
Our product trace team consists of multiple departments. A complete trace of any ingredient, finished product or packaging can be conducted utilizing searches in Protean and Crystal Reports. Raw materials on site are traced by resource numbers.
 
Raw Materials
Specifications for all raw and packaging materials are documented and kept current. Raw and packaging materials and ingredients are validated to ensure product safety and quality is not compromised and the material is fit for its intended purpose. Validation of raw materials and ingredients includes certificate of conformance, certificate of analysis, or sampling and testing.

Supplier Specifications
Steuben Foods, Inc. senior management enters into an agreement with a client by agreeing to the Manufacturing Specifications provided, contracts maintained with the senior management and Steuben lawyer team. The product requirements are maintained during production through Steuben’s Food Safety and Quality Plans and implemented Quality Manufacturing Procedures. Customer provided formulations and specifications are reviewed and adhered to during processing. Changes to any aspect of a product are submitted to Steuben Foods, Inc. through the customer’s established change control or Steuben supplied change control documentation. Steuben will route a Bill of Materials (BOM) change control document throughout the organization to communicate to relevant personnel. A signature on the BOM by relevant personnel indicates full understanding of the changes to the original Manufacturing Specifications. These BOM documents are maintained by the accounting department. 
 
Finished Product 
We work directly with our customers on formulations and specifications of their products. Customer specifications are translated into Steuben Foods’ current specification sheet format. This will include implementing any changes made by the customer by reviewing and approving newly submitted Specification Packets for existing products. The CQSC is responsible for communicating any such changes to appropriate departments via e-mail and circulating a BOM change control form.
 
Steuben specifications are developed and maintained on the LAN for all area supervisors and operators to access for each production run.  Specifications include customer required tests and limits, as well as all required microbiological and chemical tests and limits.
 
Quality Control Technicians perform tests on raw and finished products and packaging.  They document results of such testing on pertinent data sheets associated with the operation as defined in the QMS.  Out of specification situations are always communicated to supervision.
 
Release and Non-Conforming Product
All incoming ingredients and packaging follow a positive release program to assure conformance to customer standards. Non-conforming Ingredients or packaging are placed on QC Hold. A physical hold tag is placed on the material, protean inventory system and the bar code location is changed to QC hold status. This process eliminates the material from the process flow. Ingredients and packaging stay on hold until QA and/or the customer has determent disposition or release for use. 
 
All finished goods follow a positive release program as well. All non-conforming finished products are quarantined on site through a line clearance and disposed of immediately. Non-conforming Equipment is noted in our preventative maintenance program and QA records. Equipment not in use is tagged and removed from the process. All of this is documented and each record is maintained on site.
 
Internal Audits
Annual reviews are conducted on SQF policies, Food Safety programs, Pre-requisite programs and Quality policies; verification audits are conducted daily by area managers and quality systems. Monthly internal audits are an in-house check to make sure Steuben is in compliance with FDA, USDA, and NY State regulations. Cross-functional audits are done bi-annually. Raw Ingredient Storage Allergen Audits are conducted weekly by Quality Systems Compliance and Material Management. Hold Pallet audits are conducted bi-annually by the Quality Systems Compliance office and the warehouse department. Training of audit committee members are conducted in house by the Plant Sanitarian who also holds the NYS Processing Plant Superintendents license. Each area is listed with expected compliance criteria. Where corrective action is needed the appropriate department is notified and resolution records are maintained. 
 
Exterior
All plant exterior and surrounding areas are regularly maintained and are free of dusty conditions and accumulated debris, this includes all pathways, roadways and loading and unloading facilities, so as to maintain a clean and sanitary environment. 
 
Personnel
All employees and visitors use hand washing stations before entering the production facility. Employees are not permitted to perform duties if they have health conditions that could result in the microbial contamination. Minor cuts are covered with a Band-Aid and glove. No person with a communicable disease may enter our plant. The company provides uniforms to all regular employees; they are clean at the start of each shift and maintained in a serviceable condition. Part Time and temporary laborers wear their own clothing.  All clothing worn onsite meets our GMP standards. None of our staff or visitors can have visible jewelry or loose items above the waste. Rings or bands may only be worn if they do not contain stones.
 
Blending rooms are defined as a bio-sensitive areas so protective outer garments are worn when blending. Once Blending Operator leave, the protective clothing is removed. Rubber gloves and other disposable protective apparel are worn as well. A designated locker room is provided for employee garments and personal items. Changing rooms are also provided for visitor garments and personal items. Showers aren’t required but provided in the main locker room. Hand washing sinks are directly located inside all sanitary facilities. Sanitary sewer systems are installed separate from plant floor drains.
 
Pest Control and Exterior
Electric insect control devices, pheromone or other traps and baits are located so as not to present a contamination risk. Bait is never used inside ingredient or food storage or processing areas.   All openings to the outside are sealed against dust, vermin and flies. All of our access doors are fly-proofed and fitted with a self closing device. A contracted pest control company actively services all our plant areas and is certified in food plant requirements.  Equipment and poisons are not located on plant property in order to prevent contamination possibility All plant exterior and surrounding areas are regularly maintained and are free of dusty conditions and accumulated debris, this includes all pathways, roadways and loading and unloading facilities, so as to maintain a clean and sanitary environment.
 
Openings to the outside are sealed against dust, vermin and flies. All of our access doors are fly-proofed and fitted with a self closing device. A contracted pest control company actively services all our plant areas and is certified in food plant requirements.  Equipment and poisons are not located on plant property in order to prevent contamination possibility All plant exterior and surrounding areas are regularly maintained and are free of dusty conditions and accumulated debris, this includes all pathways, roadways and loading and unloading facilities, so as to maintain a clean and sanitary environment.
 
Site Security 
Food defense is a top priority at Steuben Foods. Our food defense initiative includes designated access points allowing access to only authorized staff. Sonitrol monitors our secured doors and they are never propped open. Our materials, packaging, equipment and chemicals are all securely stored throughout the facility. 
 
Security guards are stationed at the main plant entrance where we keep a log of sealed trailers and each visitor that enters the plant. Transportation of finished product is secured by locking trailers and all trucks undergo security checks based on appointments. Seal numbers on receiving and shipping documents are under constant vigilance and recorded in our trailer seal log
 
Calibration
All our equipment is calibrated against a standard established by regulatory or equipment manufacturers. Initial calibration frequencies are established on the basis of the manufacturer recommendations, regulatory requirements and/or past experience. Calibration frequencies are continually evaluated to assure effectiveness. Lab equipment calibrations are performed internally or by a certified calibration service provider on site or sent out for calibration in the case of reference standard calibrations such as thermometers and weights. 

 
Lab and Testing
Our laboratories follow a strict regimen of preliminary and real time testing. Our testing procedures survey raw ingredients, production equipment, and blended or finished product.
 
Upon receipt we test raw ingredients for microbiological content and allergens. Product is also tested after blending and again after being processed. Testing continues once product has been packaged; samples are pulled at startup, taken throughout production, and also tested after retention.
 
During finished product filling the quality micro sampling plan is executed. Finished product that passes our quality micro plan is considered to be produced above minimum health conditions and can be released for commercial sale. The micro plan is in place for food safety, but it is also a key indicator of overall package quality, as well as insterility.
 
In conjunction with the micro plan, the laboratory conducts predetermined testing regimen at a designated frequency. This testing consists of customer required evaluations. The laboratory monitors the quality of the finished product by ensuring that the results of all analytical testing fall within the customer provided specifications. 
 
For any reason overall quality prohibits final release this product may be identified as reworkable and used as a component in a raw blend of the same product. We never rework product that already contains rework. The quality of finished product containing rework is maintained by proper storage.
 
Our laboratory testing material is sterilized, neutralized and discarded. Sharp materials are collected by commercial disposal firm.  Laboratory waste water drains are separate from processing area drains. The laboratory is located separate from any food processing or handling activity and is designed to limit access only to authorized personnel.
 
Our environmental lab is located on site in a separate building. Steuben’s environmental program details microorganisms of concern, a sampling plan, and four zones to be tested. Salmonela, Listeria and other indicator organisms from the enterobacteriaceae family are the three key pathogens that we regularly test for in our environmental lab. We’ve divided the plant into four zones based on the level of risk.
Zone 1
Product contact surfaces (after microbiological reduction, but before product is sealed in the package)
Zone 2
Areas considered as non-product contact but closely adjacent to product contact surfaces
Zone 3
Areas adjacent to zone 2 with the possibility of cross contamination
Zone 4
Areas located away from manufacturing zones
 
 
 
Allergens Ingredients
We take measures to minimize the risk of contaminants entering each blend, finished product or other areas in the facility. Receiving, Blending and Quality Assurance work as a chain to ensure that all ingredient containers are free of spilled material, dirt and debris at receiving, after sampling, prior to blending, after blending and prior to storage. 
 
Receiving – Storage - Staging
All raw materials are received in closed or sealed containers. These ingredients are in both dry and liquid form. Steuben requires an Allergen Declaration from the supplier for each ingredient. QA Ingredient team provides an accessible list of allergens in use.
 
CIP (Cleaning In Place)
All production equipment is cleaned with single-use CIP systems.  Several Tetra fillers are cleaned with a single-use SCU (Self Cleaning Unit).  Some fillers have the SCU built into the filler.  The CIP systems are programmed to only allow multiple fillers that produce “like” product during the same production run to be cleaned at the same time. We never use a CIP system to simultaneously clean fillers that have finished running competing products or allergens. Our single-use CIP system provides additional allergen control through cross-contamination prevention during cleaning.
 
Blend Rooms
Ingredient containers are opened for the first time in these rooms, unless previously sampled for micro release testing.  Blend equipment is not dedicated for allergen-containing products.  Effective cleaning and visual checks are performed to assure that product residues are nonexistent.  Each blend system is checked visually for the presence of product residue after cleaning, prior to the next production run.  This includes disassembly of equipment in hard to clean areas.  Specific programs for inspection have been developed for each area. 
 
Processing Rooms
Product is not exposed during processing; however, the same processing equipment is used for multiple products. Steuben Foods relies on effective CIP programs to remove allergens and we routinely test finished soy products for the presence of milk protein. Our processing equipment is not dedicated for allergen-containing products.  Effective cleaning, visual checks and rinse water testing are performed to assure that cleaning has been adequate. All equipment is thoroughly cleaned after each production batch and prior to the next production batch.  
 
Filling Rooms & Downlines
Similar to processing: product is not exposed during filling, however, the same filling equipment is used for multiple allergen-containing products.  Our single-use CIP program is used to remove allergens and we routinely test finished products for the presence of allergens. Filling equipment is not dedicated for allergen-containing products.  Effective cleaning and visual checks are performed to assure that cleaning has been adequate and product residues are negligible. 
 
Testing for the presence of residual allergen protein is performed if competing allergens ran prior to running product on that equipment.  Bioluminescence testing is also performed at Tetra filler piping and filler valves after each cleaning and prior to filler sterilization to assure that no organic residue is present.
 
Finished Product Allergen Testing
We perform allergen testing by using allergen specific lateral flow devices and ELISA. Our policy inspects breddos, rework totes, processing systems, steritanks, production lines, and processing systems, steritanks, production lines, and load-out tankers.
 
Rinse Water Testing
After CIP is complete rinse water is collected in sterile containers and taken to the lab. Rinse water is tested for pH levels and allergen content on breddos, rework totes, processing systems, steritanks, finished blend silos and load-out tankers.
 
Finished Product Storage and Shipping
In general, all product spills are promptly cleaned up, however, spills from a product containing a known allergen are immediately cleaned and an assessment is made as to whether or not other finished products has been contaminated. Finished product containing an allergen is sealed from potential contamination of other products however all cautions are exercised to assure cross contamination of other products does not occur.  
 
The finished product containers are not opened in finished storage and shipping areas but there is the potential for spillage due to container damage or accident. 
 
 
 
Kosher and Organic
Kosher Standards
Customers contracting with Steuben Foods for the manufacture of Kosher products are responsible for sourcing certified Kosher ingredients. Customers are also responsible for providing a formulation that meets Kosher label claim and ensuring compliance of labeling with federal regulations. 
 
Raw Ingredients of a Kosher nature are accompanied by a certificate confirming Kosher classification.  This certificate is submitted to the Orthodox Union for approval.  Upon approval, the Orthodox Union adds the ingredient to Schedule A, affirming the Kosher identity of the ingredient. Approved Kosher ingredients are checked against Schedule A upon receipt.  
 
In order to maintain Kosher integrity:
Refrigerated storage temperature is 45°F or less
Product is not heated above 120°F.
Non-Kosher product is moved within 24 hours of blending
The finished product formulation is submitted to the Orthodox Union for certification as a Kosher product
 
All raw product is kept in silos and follows Kosher rules. Raw storage tanks are prepared to hold Kosher ingredients via a rabbinical blessing. In general, we don’t hold raw product for longer than 72 hours at <45 degrees. Typically, processing does not exceed 30 hours, although water-based broth products may be processed up to 48 hours.  
 
Organic Standards
Steuben Foods is proud to be an organic certified manufacturer. New partners contracting with Steuben Foods for the manufacture of Organic products are responsible for sourcing certified Organic ingredients.  Customers are also responsible for providing a formulation that meets Organic label claim and ensuring compliance of labeling with federal regulations.  
 
All organic products manufactured by Steuben Foods Inc. meet the requirements of:
The US FDA and USDA Code of Federal Regulations(CFR) ‘7 CFR PART 205 – National Organic Program
Good Manufacturing Procedures contained in Title 21 CFR
The Association of Interstate Milk Shippers (IMS)
Grade A Pasteurized Milk Ordinance (PMO).
State and municipal laws governing the manufacture, distribution and sale of food products. 
 
Our Quality Control Program assures that products are manufactured in compliance with the above requirements and provide documentation of said compliance.  Prior to any organic production equipment is cleaned according to established CIP (Clean-In-Place) methodology.  All equipment is rinsed with potable water as the final step of the automated cleaning program and all COP (Clean-Out of-Place) hand-cleaned parts, are rinsed with potable water. ‘Raw’ equipment is rinsed with an NOP approved no-rinse sanitizer (peracetic or peroxyacetic acid) before batching and all aseptic production equipment (processor and filler) is sterilized processing and filling.  
 
Packaging
The type of packaging materials or storage containers used for organic product at Steuben Foods consists of plastic, paper, foil, and aseptic packaging.  The packaging materials and containers are free of prohibited synthetic fungicides, preservatives and fumigants. The measures that are in place to prevent contamination of packaging materials and/or storage containers are segregated storage and sealed from contact.  
 
Storage Facilities 
All organic ingredients are stored in the dry warehouse ingredient storage racks. Organic ingredients are stored such that non-organic ingredients are not stored above organics in the racking locations.  All ingredient pallets are labeled for ease of identification.  Off site contracted storage facilities are not required to be certified.  However, our certified operator does ensure that the integrity of organic ingredients/products is maintained during storage at the facility.  Measures are in place that prevent the integrity of the organic product from being compromised.  
 
Organic Cleaning and Sanitation
MSDS are on file for all cleaners and sanitizers used on the organic line in the MSDS book.  The QAI addendum materials list for Steuben Foods is documented for all cleaners and sanitizers on surfaces, equipment or utensils prior to contact with organic products. A GMP audit is done monthly to ensure that the conditions are compliant. Non-permeable packaging, rinse water testing and  employee training all assist to prevent contamination of product while using sanitation materials in the facility.
 
Pest Management
Pest management materials used in Steuben Foods facility do not come in contact with organic packaging materials or storage bins.  The application of pesticides or rodenticides to areas outside the plant walls are performed in a controlled manner to pose no threat to the organic status of the plant.   Steuben Foods does not store pest control materials in the facility.   Pest Control monitoring meets the National Organic Program requirements.  Organic finished product is contained in non permeable packaging.  
 
Water
The water used in the facility comes from the Erie County Water Authority.  Erie County sends out annual water reports.  The water is used for cooking product, steaming product, cleaning products, cleaning equipment and used for ingredient.  Water that comes in contact with an organic product does not contaminate the product with prohibited substances.    The boiler produces food contact steam however the boiler additives do not pose a contamination threat to organic integrity.  
 
Dairy
All fluid milk is pasteurized or heat treated at the Raw Dairy Plant prior to shipment to the Main Plant at Steuben Foods. Product complies with regulatory, certification and company standards. All powdered dairy ingredients are sampled for SPC and coliform.  Actual testing or certification ascertains that the ingredient is essentially free of E.coli, Salmonella and Staphylococcus.
Only organic dairy ingredients is used in the manufacture of organic milk products and effective practices are utilized to assure that nonorganic ingredients are not used in the manufacture of organic products.
 
Non-Dairy
All ingredients that are received meet regulatory, certification organization and company requirements.  All ingredients are evaluated for presence of contamination or adulteration prior to receipt.  Ingredients will not be received if containers or packaging is open, damaged.
 
Soy base is processed from soybeans that are certified as organically grown.  Upon receipt all organic soy base is segregated into separate storage tanks to maintain organic integrity.  
 
Only organic non-dairy ingredients are used in the manufacture of organic food products.  If particular organic ingredients are not available ingredients may be used that are not organic.  As a certified organic manufacturer we determine the acceptable use of such ingredients however in general, these ingredients may not constitute more than 5% of the finished product.
 
 
 
Storage
On Site
Steuben Foods is equipped with ambient and cooled storage for product and packaging. All storage areas are of safe and sanitary design, well lit, regularly cleaned and kept dry. Our warehouses are regulated and routinely audited for compliance. Storage racks are constructed and designed to enable cleaning of the floors. 
 
Our cooled storage design is sufficient for production capacity. Ingredient thawing is accomplished with cold air flow inside properly constructed cooler rooms so as to eliminate deterioration and/or contamination. Cooled product temperature does not exceed 45 degrees F at any time during the thawing process. Discharge from defrost and condensation is drained through a draining system. We do not offer frozen storage on site. 
 
Off Site
Steuben Foods has conducted a risk analysis of all off-site warehouses to ensure there is no risk to the integrity of those goods.  Quality Assurance routinely audits off site frozen, cooled, and ambient storage facilities. Each audit is documented and all records are maintained on the company database.
 
 
 


